Introduction
to coffee
A TRAINING GUIDE

SPECIES & VARIETY
Just as the many grape varieties give us different styles of wine, coffee has many varieties
and flavours. The two key species of coffee that we drink are Arabica and Robusta,
although many others do exist such as Liberica and Excelsa.
ARABICA ROBUSTA
FLAVOUR PROFILE FLAVOUR PROFILE
Citrus/higher acidity Lower acidity
Cleaner/sometimes floral Earthy and round
Lighter body Richer body
Lighter crema Darker heavier crema
GREEN BEAN IDENTITY GREEN BEAN IDENTITY
Green in colour Brown in colour
General oval in shape (beetle) Generally rounder in shape (ladybird)
KEY CHARACTERISTICS KEY CHARACTERISTICS
Lower in caffeine Twice the caffeine
Grown at higher altitude Grown at lower altitude
COMMON VARIETIES COMMON VARIETIES
Typica, Bourbon, Caturra, Gesha, Known as Conilon in Brazil
Pacas, Catuai
3
THE COFFEE CHERRY
CHERRY ANATOMY
1
1. GREEN BEAN
2
2. SILVER SKIN
3
3. PARCHMENT
4. MUCILAGE
4
5. PULP
5
6. CHERRY SKIN
6
4
PROCESSING
Processing refers to the way we extract green beans from the coffee cherry. Three
main methods are used to do this, the most common of which are the wet (washed)
process and the dry (natural) process. The choice of processing method has a
profound impact on the potential flavour and body of our green coffee.
WASHED PROCESS
Pulp and skins are mechanically removed from the ripe cherries. The beans, still
in their parchment skins and covered with sticky mucilage are put into tanks of
water for a few days to ferment. The mucilage is washed from the beans and then
they are dried in the sun (“sun-dried”) or in drying rooms. Variations in the length
of water-soaking or drying time can influence different degrees of fruit character
in the green beans.
PULPED NATURAL/HONEY PROCESS
This process sits between the two other methods. First the outer cherry skin is
mechanically removed but then, rather than being washed the beans are left to
dry in the sun, still covered with their parchment and mucilage. Known as Pulped
Natural in it’s native Brazil, this method has gained popularity and is now used
worldwide. Outside Brazil it is normally referred to as Honey Processing after
the Spanish word “miel”, which means “honey” and refers to the sticky, sweet
mucilage left on the bean. The method can be further categorised as “Yellow”,
“Red” or “Black” depending on how much mucilage is removed prior to drying.
DRY/NATURAL PROCESS
Whole ripe cherries are laid in the sun for several weeks whilst being turned
regularly to prevent spoilage. The longer and more carefully managed the process,
the sweeter and more intense the fruit flavours may become. After drying, the
brittle outer skin is mechanically removed from the bean. Boozy or “funky” notes
in natural coffees used to be considered defects but are now often valued for their
contribution to cup character.
5
MILL PICK
WASH MILL DRY
DRY DRY MILL
WASHED HONEY DRY
Characteristics Characteristics Characteristics
Bright Bright Earthy/Funky
Clean Sweet Sweet
Light Body Medium Body Full Body
Crisp Fruity Fruity
6
WORLD VIEW
NORTH AMERICA
TROPIC OF CANCER
1
3
‘THE BEAN BELT’
2
CENTRAL/SOUTH AMERICA
TROPIC OF CAPRICORN
CENTRAL/SOUTH AMERICA
This region displays enormous diversity in coffee styles, from the bright,
sweet and citrusy high altitude Arabicas of Central America (1) to the soft,
wheaty and nutty coffees of Brazil (2). Home to the some of the biggest
coffee farms in the world, Brazil is the world’s largest coffee producer, it’s
lower altitude providing suitable growing conditions for both Arabica and
Robusta (known locally as “Conilon”). Colombia (3), another large producer,
straddles these two regions and dependent on altitude can produce coffees
that range in style from nutty and sweet to floral and fruit-driven.
7
ASIA
Though primarily known for it’s Robusta, Asia is home to
a growing market for domestically produced Arabicas (8),
some of which are beginning to meet Speciality grade.
Vietnam (9) is the world’s second-largest producer of coffee,
a fact that is little known due to it’s low-grade Robusta
ending up primarily in either instant coffee or hidden away
in cheaper blends. India (7) on the other hand is home to
some of the world’s best Robusta, which can be as sweet,
EUROPE rich and gentle as it’s low altitude Arabicas. Indonesian
(10) coffee derives it’s trademark earthy, mellow spice and
chocolate notes from a unique processing method called
“Giling Basah” and exceptionally high levels of humidity.
8
7
6 ASIA
5
4
10
AFRICA
AUSTRALIA
AFRICA
Home to both the tropical, humid lowlands of the Congo (4) and the drier, higher altitudes in and
around Ethiopia (6), Africa is the birthplace of both Arabica and Robusta coffee. Evolving to suit
these differing conditions, Arabica now grows worldwide where sufficient altitude protects this more
delicate crop from the pests and diseases that are more prevalent in humid, lower lying regions
where Robusta thrives.
Ethiopia produces some of the most striking and unusual coffees grown anywhere in the world, from
intensely fruity or winey naturals to floral and jasmine scented washed coffees. Indeed the highly
prized Gesha varietal takes it’s name and derives it’s style from the coffees of the Gesha mountains
in the Yirgecheffe region. Further West, a cluster of countries that include Kenya (5), Burundi and
Rwanda are famed for coffees that balance pleasingly high levels of sweetness, fruit and acidity.
8
ROASTING
The final link in the flavour chain is roasting. This process develops flavours and
hopefully reveals the true potential hidden inside the green coffee. These coffees
may be presented on their own (single-origin or single-estate) or blended together
to create new flavour profiles. As coffee darkens in the roaster, sweetness, body
and eventually bitterness increases whilst natural fruity acidity diminishes.
ACIDIC BITTER
Green Light/Cinnamon Medium Full Roast/Italian French
FRESHNESS
Roasted coffee will quickly oxidise, losing aromatic qualities and developing a stale,
woody flavour. It is best stored in a cool, dry place away from strong odours and
moisture. Fridges are nice and cold but far too wet for storing coffee. A freezer is
better but it is generally agreed that in most cases, coffee is best enjoyed as fresh
as possible.
HOW FRESH IS “FRESH”?
In the bag It can be legally used up to 12 months from roasting but would be
lifeless in the later months. It is best used in the first 2 months after
roasting, but may benefit from a rest of one or two weeks before
use in order to allow excess roast gases to escape (“gassing off”).
In the hopper Put in what you hope to use in a day and leave the remaining
coffee in it’s bag, wound down and fastened with a clip or
elastic band.
Once ground Use immediately!
9
DARKWOODS COFFEE LTD
Holme Mills . West Slaithwaite Road . Marsden
WEST YORKSHIRE . UK . Hd7 6ls
T: +44 (0)1484 843 141
darkwoodscoffee.co.uk
